For example, at Penn, the subvention was $200,000
a year and free use of investment money and free
space. At A&M, the subvention is $330,000 a year,
free space, free use of investment money, and
these funds that we have That amount to, you know,
if you take the total amount that's in these funds,
it's around $4 million. And those funds are very
important to the financial stability of this
press. They can't suffice alone. We also need the
subvention. But between the funds and the
subvention, This press was far better off than any
other press I had seen. I had served on a review
committee at Northwestern, which was in very bad
shape financially, and had serious problems. At
Cornell, where they were losing money and didn't
have financial support. The university was
supporting them, but grudging them. So I felt one
of the reasons I came here was because it did have
both the psychological and emotional support
from its administration
that
Henry Quest needed, and it had financial support
better than any other place. So those were the
factors, probably, Henry, that convinced me.
Okay, now, when you arrived, how were you? Are you
disappointed? Were your perceptions okay? No. I
think I got what I bargained for. I thought that
this place was every bit what I suspected it was.
There was only one surprise, and it escaped me
because I didn't have a base for it, and that is the
bureaucracy of a state university. has been my
biggest frustration at A&M. It's not anything
that causes me to go home at night and go to sleep.
But it is more frustrating to deal with than what I
had to deal with. And this is less of an
entrepreneurial kind of institution than Penn
was. Penn was very entrepreneurial. And so at
Penn, the money went to people who demonstrated
that they could make money for the university do
what they had to do for the university. Here, it's
more bureaucratic. It's political here. And you
could, in my judgment, you could be one of the best
managers or administrators around. And if you're
not doing it politically or from a bureaucratic
point of view, you won't get any more money. They
give money to the people who demonstrate. In fact,
I wonder if sometime this if the efficiency of this
press might not have targeted the press in terms of
the financial. It did. Robert Smith, for example,
targeted it because it was being successful
financially, so they went after it. At Penn, they
would give it more money because they said, you're
doing terrifically. And that's one thing I had
to... I had to come to grips with when I came here. I
mean, some of the staff, I would say things at our
advisory council meeting where I would report
financially what we were doing and how well we were
doing. And Diana Hine would come up to me and say,
don't tell them that, because they'll take our
money away if you do that. And I said, well, I was
taken aback by that. I said, well, no. I said, if
you're doing well, you should tell people that,
and you should be rewarded for it. That's right.
Bureaucrats don't think that way. That's the
difference between the way an entrepreneur
thinks and the way a bureaucrat thinks. And so that
has had to be something I've been doing. Good,
because I have that in the text already. And I
haven't focused it, but it's there. Do it, because
that's a clear factor in this university. That was
the only explanation for part of what was going on.
It's
classic that a Robert Smith, would do that. He's a
classic bureaucrat. And so he goes after people
who have money, so he takes it away from them and
would give that money to someone that was
politically sensitive for him, that would
accomplish his goals, his objectives, that sort
of thing. And to me, that was the wrong thing to do.
Now, that didn't happen to me. It hasn't happened
to me. But the people here were fearful that it
would happen. Yes. Yes, I know. I picked that up
several levels. Yeah. I continue, even though I
know that there are bureaucrats here, and there
are people who think that way, I still have
confidence that if you demonstrate to people that
you're accomplishing the goals that you set out to
be, like my goals are two goals. I've got to enhance
the reputation of the press and the university by
virtue of our publishing program. And I have to do
that in a financially responsible way. And I feel
that If I do that, I should tell people about it and
not worry that they're going to take money away
from me. I would prefer not to do that. So at the
advisory council meeting, Ray Bowen goes to that
meeting, Barry Thompson goes to that meeting, and
I give a report. And I tell them what we're doing
financially. We're doing extremely well
financially, and I never... for the moment
hesitated, or blushed, or anything like that. I
told the facts. And I had confidence, maybe wrong,
that they would say, this guy's doing what he's
supposed to do. That's right. And the other side of
that coin is, the money placed with a press is
well-placed. Yes. It pays dividends. If I were
president, that's the way I would think. That's
the way it should be. That's the way I would run the
university. I would put money in the hands of
people who can demonstrate that they know what to
do with it. And the ones who don't, I would not give
them any money, or I'd get rid of them. That's
right. It doesn't always work that way. No, it
doesn't. So when you arrive, what are your first
administrative acts or
encounters? Well, the first thing we had to do at
that point, there are many things, but one of the
crucial things was to decide on what kind of a
publisher we wanted to be. Did we want to become a
regional publisher in Frank's version of that?
Did we want to become something more than that? And
I had decided after my interviews here, and based
on what my own goals are as an individual, as a
publisher, that we should maintain, indeed maybe
even strengthen, our ability as a regional
publisher, but at the same time start becoming
more of a scholarly publisher, with the ability to
reach an international audience and become much
more important as an international publisher and
a national publisher. So I wanted to make sure that
the staff felt that way too and the staff did. You
know, we talked about what we should do and how we
should do it, what was important to us, and the
staff wanted to go beyond being a regional
publisher because they were getting the
criticism too. Gayla and Mary Lynn, who sat in the
search committee meetings. Gayla was a member of
the search committee. They would hear Ham Hill
say, you know, I think we have a backward press. It
is nothing but a regional publisher. We are not
known by my colleagues around the world or
nationally. And it's an embarrassment. And he
would say those things. And so they knew that their
survival was dependent upon the goodwill of the
faculty and our reputation. They were worried
about it. They knew that if Ham Hill went to Ray
Bowen or to the provost and said things like that,
that it might affect their future. So they were
100% behind the idea. So what we decided to do was
to... Now, did you have sort of a series of Or is this
just part of the usual schedule of events in terms
of ? Well, first of all, I made it a practice for us to
have biweekly staff meetings. And they used to
have weekly meetings. They were meeting too much
with the staff. The whole press would meet with the
staff. So I changed that to making it just the
departmental managers meeting bi-weekly. And
then I met weekly with each departmental manager.
And then I encouraged each staff member to do the
same thing with each manager, to meet with their
staff. But we did this both formally as well as
informally. and we decided what areas we would
focus on. You know, we would get out of areas where
we were not a player, not a significant player, and
we would focus on areas where we were a significant
player. Okay, can you define those? Sure, sure.
They're areas that won't surprise you. From a
regional point of view, we wanted to maintain our,
and indeed strengthen our position in Texas
history, southwestern history, military
history, But
we clearly said we wanted to do everything, if not
more, than what we had been doing in the regional
areas. We also wanted to expand areas where we had
some presence. needed to become more of an
international publisher such as natural science
or natural history nautical archaeology where we
were we had an international reputation in a field
that is a very small field but was good for us
because this university has a reputation there
we've been doing books there so nautical
archaeology was another we wanted to start
publishing in Presidential Studies because of
the Bush Library, because we knew that would
provide opportunities. So we wanted to do an
international effort there. And we hired
consulting editors. We started a series fund. Joe
Hughes gave us $50,000. So Presidential Studies
was an area where we wanted to speak anthropology.
How did you get that $50,000? I actually got it by
talking with Joe Hughes. Joe Hughes was a guy who is
an Aggie who's made money in the oil business. And
he and I started talking, and we wanted to know what
opportunities there were for the press. I talked
to him about presidential studies, about giving
one to know how much money. I told him a minimum of
$50,000, but we would prefer $100,000. He ended up
giving us $50,000. We tried to get $100,000, but we
couldn't get it. You know, just as simply as that,
just talking to a certain person was interesting.
Where did you run into him? Frank Hubert, who used
to be the chancellor of this place, told me about
him. And he is Frank's nephew, or something like
that. It's related to Frank. And so we first
started talking on the phone. And he was impressed
with the fact that Frank used to get a free copy of
every one of our books. And he worked me over for our
giving him them. We send him a copy of every one of
our books when we publish, as we do all the other
administrators around here. But he would not have
given us the money did not do that. It was important
for him to see what was happening. Yeah, and he
likes books. He's a book lover, you know, so that
way we were able to tie his interest in books.
That's what I asked John. I said, do you like books?
Yeah. I suspected if you asked Joe Moore the same
question, he might say the same thing. I don't
know. I don't know if I asked Joe that. I think I did.
And I think that's basically, if I didn't, that's
the response. I think people who give money to
presses have to like books, but these two guys are
exceptional. They've given us money. I think they
like Frank Wardlaw, and they, you know, someone
convinced them. Yeah, they're people perfect.
Yeah. They saw Frank as a visionary, and probably,
you know, bought into him. Anyway, Joe Hughes...
gave us money because, I think, of his love for
books. And he wanted to do something for his
university, so we got him to do it that way. But
presidential studies, anthropology,
borderland studies, nautical archaeology,
architecture, these are all fields where we had
some potential or presence, and we said, These are
the areas we want to focus on and build a reputation
internationally. We also wanted to build on some
strengths at A&M, like agriculture and vet
medicine. And so we're trying to build a series in
those areas too, but they are not as a higher
priority for us at this point because we have so
many fish to fry in this other area. And we don't
have a lot of people to do acquisitions, so we have
to focus on areas where we have the highest
potential. And those areas are basically what I
just told you. Most of the stuff that Mary Lynn
does, for example, is borderlands, presidential
studies, Western history, Texana. Most of the
stuff that Noel does is military history, natural
science,
architecture, nautical archaeology. So those
are areas where we're trying to build our
architecture. Have you seen anything on the list
that we really don't need to make an area that How
about the arts here? Where do you want to go? Well,
Texas art, because we have money, and Joe Moore,
Joe Bay, we continue to do those, and we will. We see
that as part of the regional thing that we should
maintain. That's not an area where we said, let's
get out of it. How
many times have I said this? decided
to get out was philosophy.
And that proved to be very ticklish politically,
because
Herman Sadekamp had, I think, been signed as an
editor. And
we had to tell him that we didn't know what to focus
on. Performing arts, that was a field we were in. We
dabbled in literature and literary criticism,
and we felt that that was an area where we either had
to go in in a big way or get out, and we decided
to get out of it. International history, like
British history or European history, we felt was
not important to us. I think
Balkan studies were there. Eastern European
studies we see as more of a, not just history, but
that one is where we decided to focus. where we felt
we had a shot. But we didn't want to do 20th century
European history books, or ancient history
books, or medieval history books, or things like
that. And we had done an occasional book there.
Journalism, we said no. We had done some books
there.
We didn't want to do any books there. We said
literature, folklore. Folklore only insofar as
it relates to Texas history and Texana, then we
would do folklore. Medical humanities, you know,
getting out of that field. Performing arts, you
know, film, music, theater, getting out of that.
That's OK. Education.
Sociology. Sports. We had done the occasional
sports, but we said no. So those are basically the
areas we got out of. The areas we stayed in are the
ones that I've already mentioned. Our strong
suits are Texas history, natural science,
Nautical archaeology,
borderland studies.
What about economics? We don't regard it as a
strong field, but because we have a series fund, we
want to continue to publish them. We are
publishing them. Wherever we had series money, we
felt that we had a presence. We decided to stay in.
But if we didn't have money, we didn't have a
presence, we decided to get out. So this is one of
the major things that I had to do when I came here,
was to decide what kind of publisher we wanted to be
and what fields we wanted to focus on. And we did
that as a staff, and we used certain criteria to
make the judgment. Financial support, presence,
whether the field was competitive or not
competitive, and whether we could never make a
dent no matter how much money we had because the
field was just dominated by too many other people.
But in scholarly publishing, you don't have to
worry about that one too much because none of the
fields are, while there are dominant publishers,
you can become a scholarly publisher without
difficulty if you have the money. What are your
aspirations in terms of production for the press,
in terms of volume, numbers of books? When you
came, we were running 35, 40. Between 35, it varied
between 30 to 35 books. Maybe 40. We're now doing
about 60. That is, in this fiscal year, we will do 61
books. We took our two catalogs and counted the
books. We're about 61 books now. When we built our
long-range plan, we talked about doing 100 books a
year. And we ultimately decided against it
because we felt, the staff felt strongly about
this. We
felt that if we became that big a publisher, we
would have to start changing the culture. We would
have to expand it. We would have to get more money.
We would start interfering with our daily lives
more than we wanted to. So they're very proud of the
family. They are. And Frank built it on a family
basis. I'm not a family publisher. Unlike Frank, I
believe that if you start mixing family with
business, you have problems. The big problem, in
my mind, when you're running a family business, so
to speak, is if you have to fire someone, you can't
do it. Try firing one of your children, for
example. You can't do it. So I have strong
management feelings about whether you should
become as family-oriented as Frank was. Frank got
away with it. Frank did it. Frank exploited it. But
it's not my style. It doesn't fit the modern world
very well. No, it doesn't. It's a different era.
But that is part of the culture. That's what he...
That was part of the Stetter problem. The family
got disrupted. Yeah, that's right. And I don't
know if Stetter knew enough about management
to... Well, he didn't. He didn't know enough about
management to even recognize that probably it was
a family management notion around here. Although
maybe he did. Maybe unfairly. But he got him in
trouble. Certainly did, yeah. So you backed off,
and you're kind of settled back to a, what, 60, 75
titles, or do you have a real target? I don't think
we, you know, we do. I'd say that we're trying to
maintain around 60, 65 titles. Why? We think
that's optimum for the number of people we have
here and for the kind of environment we want to
maintain. We go beyond that. We're going to have to
expand the place physically, expand it in terms of
personnel, and we think that given the conditions
that exist in the industry today, it's probably
not a wise thing to do. Tremendous problems in the
industry. Okay, what kind of problems? That's
what I want to talk to you about, too, in a little
bit. Where do you see book publishing going,
especially university book publishing? What's
out there now? The big problem that's out there now
is that the scholarly monograph is under serious
directs. That is, libraries, the principal
purchasers of scholarly monographs, are cutting
back and spending more money on technology than
they are on books. And so every university in
France that publishes scholarly monographs has
seen their their sales declined dramatically.
That's one of the wisdoms that Frank had. Frank
knew 20 years ago that scholarly publishing was
deficit publishing. He knew that if he just did
scholarly monographs, he'd go out of business, or
that the administration would stop supporting
him. So he said, I'm going to do books that are
regional significance. Those books sell. And I
like doing them anyway, and I'll keep the rules,
the financial rules away from the door, and I'll
accomplish what I believe in, and that's the way to
do it. The problem is, you know, that works
financially, but it doesn't keep the academic
books up. You know, so guys like Ham Hill and Silver
and other people that Frank had trouble with got
after him because he was too conventional. So the
trick today is, if you're running a university
press, is you've got to be financially
responsible, and you've got to accomplish what
universities expect university presses to do,
which is to contribute to scholarship, enhance
the reputation of the university, keep the
faculty happy. So doing that today is tougher than
it has ever been.
The libraries aren't buying books. Even the
people who are publishing saleable books, like
regional books and trade books, those books are
being returned. The superstores now are buying
these books in great quantities, but they're
returning them in even greater quantities. Oh, I
know. They are. I know. I've personally
experienced that. Yeah. So the trick is you need to
publish, in my view, a variety of books. You can't
just do regional books. You can't just do
scholarly monographs. You've got to do
textbooks, professional books, reference
books, and electronic things as well. And you've
got to do that within a financial framework that is
consistent with what the person expects. Yeah.
Can you, for example, do a text type book?
Absolutely. Absolutely. There's always been
some constraint, at least talking, for example,
to Boyd, I guess. You always worry about the
charitable philanthropic status of the press. If
you start joining the marketplace, what happens?
I think that's enough. Unnecessary. The
University Press is long before Lloyd Lyman was in
the University Press. Well, Chicago, of course,
is the classic. Chicago, I mean, absolutely. I
mean, when I was a student, I used a Chicago book
that was called Animals Without Backbones. Now,
this was back in 1950. That was the
best-selling... General Biology. Yeah, it was
the best-selling invertebrate zoology book. I
mean, Lloyd had a different notion of that. Lloyd
was from the old, he was from the August Fruget
School of Books, which was, you know, pristine
scholarly monographs where, you know, you don't
dirty yourself with commercial kind of things.
And now, I may be miscasting him, but university
presses have been publishing textbooks as ever
since probably they've been in business. Some of
them even started doing textbooks. And you can do
textbooks. You can't do the basic blockbuster
introductory biology books. That's a commercial
gain. But you can do the supplemental pieces. You
can do the supplemental books. And how many
university press books have you used on a
supplemental basis in teaching history courses?
I think you used a number of them over the years.
Certainly. I tried to, of course. Exactly.
Vandiver's, whatever, Blood Brothers. Sure. 20%
of our business is probably... I think there's a
place for that. Absolutely. I think that's a big
opportunity there. Absolutely. There's a place
for us in reference publishing, and we do
reference publishing. There's a place for us in
professional publishing, and we do professional
publishing. You know, I think the answer is you've
got to do a variety of different types of books. But
you need to focus on a smaller number of areas where
you have strength, presence, and the financial
ability to do what is important. And so that's what
we're setting out to do. And I think Frank set out to
do that in regional publishing. And he would do the
occasional scholarly monograph to keep some
people happy, and probably to justify the fact
that he was a university press. But there are now
university press directors that are saying, we
can't survive doing these kind of labels. We've
got to become a trade publisher. And I think if they
do that, they're headed into a disaster. First of
all, Why does a university need a trade publisher?
I mean, if I was Ray Bowen, it's the last thing in the
world I'd want is a trade publisher. But I'd
certainly want a scholarly publisher to enhance
our reputation, and to help spread the word about
A&M, and to give us visibility, and to be able to say
to ourselves, we're a research university, and we
disseminate and diffuse that research through
books and other electronic products. So that's,
in my view, the way university presses have got to
operate in the future. And I think they will. And I
think that they have been doing that in the past.
It's just that some of them have done things a
little bit differently. Some of them have done
like a pen. 95% of the books we did were scholarly
modern books. That was strictly a scholarly
publishing and we had the support of the
university to do that and that's the way we did our
business. Frank said We're not going to do
scholarly monographs. First of all, probably I
don't like them too much. Secondly, they don't
make money. Third, I'm interested in promoting
the Southwest as a cultural enterprise. Romantic
world. So that's the way he cut it. And at Texas, he
ran out of steam. Do you feel like you get any kind of
direction, supervision,
from the higher administration at A&M, or do they
leave you pretty much alone, or are you pretty much
an independent director? I would say that Ray
Bowman does that in his year, and all the others. I
have the occasional instance where there
was a time, I'm going to tell you the story, because
it illustrates how I'd like to ask you a little bit
about Texas A&M University Press and its
relations to other Texas presses, and
particularly, I suppose, to your clients and your
distributors and your associates and whoever.
Well, basically I'd say that the two major presses
in Texas are UT and A&M. UT is clearly a more
important and larger press than A&M. Frank, I
think, was there longer and did a better job, had
more time, of course, to do.